add blog post Kubernetes Operator with Java and Quarkus (#30)
lunatech-labs/lunatech-blog: posts/2021-06-11-kubernetes-operator-with-java-and-quarkus.adoc

= Kubernetes Operator with Java and Quarkus

== The goal of this blog post

> A Kubernetes operator is an application that runs

Reviewer: Looks like this is missing the rest of the sentence?

Author: added the missing part.

> An Operator can be used for various reasons. The most common purposes of operators are managing database clusters, preparing database schemas, and restoring backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Kubernetes Operator, referred to as an operator in the remainder of this article, can be used for various purposes. The most common ones are managing database clusters, preparing database schemas, and restoring backups.
```

Reviewer 2: I think ti's best to refer to the topic of the talk by its full name (Kubernetes Operator) and then use an abbreviated form

> An Operator can be used for various reasons. The most common purposes of operators are managing database clusters, preparing database schemas, restoring backups, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Operator can be used for various reasons. The most common purposes of operators are managing database clusters, preparing database schemas, and restoring backups.

I'd avoid using `etc` in your leading sentence.
```

Even though Kubernetes provides extensive support for multiple container management operations, it doesn't cover all potential cases related to application management. Some applications need the manual intervention of a human operator. A Kubernetes operator is an application that runs in the cluster and manages resources.

> It allows transferring of operational knowledge of the human operator into software components. Operators can be used for multiple purposes such as restoring data, creating cloud resources, resilience testing, and many others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows the transfer of operational knowledge of the human operator into software components. Operators can be used for multiple purposes such as restoring data, creating cloud resources, resilience testing, and many others.
```

> The purpose of this blog post is to demonstrate how to quickly write and deploy a simple Kubernetes operator using Java, and provide an example of tasks that can be performed using an operator.

Reviewer 2: I would change this a bit to introduce quarkus into the story

```suggestion
The purpose of this blog post is to demonstrate how to quickly write and deploy a simple Kubernetes operator using Java, and provide an example of tasks that can be performed using an operator in the context of the deployment of a service built with Quarkus.
```

==== Why Java?

> * Being able to develop operators in Java can bring a lot of benefits for companies and individuals that are focused mainly on the Java stack.

Reviewer: Sort of a side note, but depending on how familiar people are with operators this might not be a strong argument. Could I use a simple scripting language instead? Is it solely because a person knows Java that they'd want to do it in Java, or could there be other benifits?

Author: The main argument is this could be quite useful for people that are familiar with Java, and don’t want to spend time learning Go or something else before they can start developing operators. I am not trying to prove that Java is a better fit than any other commonly used languages.

> ==== The benefits of choosing Java and Quarkus

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can change this from a title into an intro to the different bullet points:

```suggestion
I decided to use a Quarkus service written in Java for the following reasons:
```

> * Quarkus with the main focus on cloud-native, and microservice solutions looks like a good fit for building an operator.

Reviewer: I'd re-word this sentence a bit. Since you are under the "Why Java" section. So this seems a bit out of place or not tied into the main point. Also, as someone not super familiar with operators, why is something with cloud-native and microservice solutions a good fit?

Author: I changed the heading to 
`==== The benefits of choosing Java and Quarkus`
to make the items tight to the main point.

Also, add some extra explanation regarding why cloud-native is a good fit.
`Technologies such as containers, microservices, immutable infrastructure, deployed via declarative code are common elements of cloud-native computing approach. It is a good fit for writing an operator which needs to be deployed in a container, and the state of resources managed by an operator is defined in a declarative way. Quarkus with the main focus on cloud-native, and microservice solutions looks like a good fit for building an operator.`

> * Operator SDK also has neat features such as generating Kubernetes resources for operator deployment and creating custom resource definition yaml files based on the Java code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The operator SDK also has neat features such as generating Kubernetes resources for operator deployments and creating custom resource definition yaml files based on the Java code.
```

> * Java kubernetes-client supports multiple operations: such as creating resources, patching, copying files,  executing commands, fetching logs and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Java kubernetes-client supports multiple operations: such as creating resources, patching, copying files,  executing commands, fetching logs and
```

https://github.com/fabric8io/kubernetes-client/tree/master/kubernetes-examples/src/main/java/io/fabric8/kubernetes/examples[many others].

== What this operator does?

This simple hello world operator demonstrates how to create a stateful set via Kubernetes API and make sure that the data is loaded into each pod and consumed by the application before creating new pods.

image::../media/2021-06-11-kubernetes-operator-with-java-and-quarkus/image-2021-04-18-22-56-52-151.png[width=40%, align="center"]

> It performs following operations with Kubernetes API using java  https://github.com/kubernetes-client/java[kubernetes-client] and https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-operator-sdk[quarkus-operator-sdk] :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It performs the following operations with Kubernetes API using the java  https://github.com/kubernetes-client/java[kubernetes-client] and https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-operator-sdk[quarkus-operator-sdk] :
```

> * watch custom resource creation/modification
> * watch pod creation/modification
> * create and scale statefulsets
> * check content of log output
> * execute commands in a container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* watches custom resource creation/modification
* watches pod creation/modification
* creates and scales statefulsets
* checks content of log output
* executes commands in a container
```

== Project setup

> An official webpage to Generate Quarkus application https://code.quarkus.io. The generated project also includes https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/[Dockerfile] for building https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/images/[Docker images].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An official webpage to Generate Quarkus application https://code.quarkus.io. The generated project also includes a https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/[Dockerfile] for building https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/images/[Docker images].
```

WORKDIR /work/
RUN chown 1001 /work \
    && chmod "g+rwX" /work \
    && chown 1001:root /work
COPY --chown=1001:root target/*-runner /work/application

EXPOSE 8080
USER 1001

CMD ["./application", "-Dquarkus.http.host=0.0.0.0"]
----
====

==== Add dependencies into a project:

https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-operator-sdk[quarkus-operator-sdk]
[,xml]
----
<dependency>
<groupId>io.quarkiverse.operatorsdk</groupId>
<artifactId>quarkus-operator-sdk</artifactId>
<version>1.8.2</version>
</dependency>
----
https://github.com/kubernetes-client/java[kubernetes-client]
[,xml]
----
<dependency>
 <groupId>io.kubernetes</groupId>
 <artifactId>client-java</artifactId>
 <version>12.0.0</version>
</dependency>
----

Proxy kubernetes cluster API to local machine for the local development

----
kubectl --namespace kube-system --disable-filter=true proxy kube-apiserver-kind-control-plane
----
Configure application.properties for the local development environment

----
quarkus.kubernetes-client.trust-certs=false
quarkus.kubernetes-client.namespace=default
quarkus.kubernetes-client.master-url=http://127.0.0.1:8001/
----

== Kubernetes custom resource definitions

> It is possible to extend the Kubernetes API with custom resources, in order to store and modify the desired object specification and state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's possible to extend the Kubernetes API with custom resources in order to store and modify the desired object specification and state.
```

> Based on the content of classes below application generates https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/[custom-resource-definitions] which can be used to create https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/[custom-resources]. During the start application outputs yaml of custom resource definitions to a file in the directory _./target/kubernetes/_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the content of the classes in the below application, it generates https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/[custom-resource-definitions] which can be used to create https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/[custom-resources]. When the application starts it outputs yaml, which is the custom resource definitions to a file in the _./target/kubernetes/_ directory.
```
Might have to play around with the ending a bit.

> Create custom resource definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a custom resource definition
```

.HelloWorld.java
[,java]
----
@Group("example.com")
@Version("v1alpha1")
@ShortNames("hw")
public class HelloWorld extends CustomResource<HelloWorldSpec, HelloWorldStatus> implements Namespaced {

   private HelloWorldSpec spec;
   private HelloWorldStatus status;

   // {...}
}
----

Creating specification fields of the custom resource.

.HelloWorldSpec.java
[,java]
----
public class HelloWorldSpec {

   private String name;
   private String image;
   private String data;
   private int replicas;

   // {...}
}
----

The status fields of the custom resource

.HelloWorldStatus.java
[,java]
----
public class HelloWorldStatus {

   private Integer readyReplicas = 0;

   // {...}
}
----

> Create custom resource of kind HelloWorld

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a custom resource of kind HelloWorld
```

[,yaml]
.hello-world-example.yaml
----
apiVersion: example.com/v1alpha1
kind: HelloWorld
metadata:
  name: hello-world-example
spec:
  name: hello-world
  image: busybox
  replicas: 3
  data: |
   Example of injected data
----

----
kubectl create -f hello-world-example.yaml
----

> == A client to connect to Kubernetes API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== A client to connect to the Kubernetes API
```

.KubernetesClientProducer.java
[,java]
----
@Singleton
public class KubernetesClientProducer {

   @Produces
   public KubernetesClient kubernetesClient() {
       return new DefaultKubernetesClient(command in container);
   }
}
----

A controller which listens to custom resource creation and updates
[,java]
----
@Controller(namespaces = "default")
public class HelloWorldController  implements ResourceController<HelloWorld> {

   / ... /

   @Override
   public DeleteControl deleteResource(HelloWorld resource, Context<HelloWorld> context) {...}

   @Override
   public UpdateControl<HelloWorld> createOrUpdateResource(HelloWorld helloWorldRequest, Context<HelloWorld> context) {...}

   @Override
   public void init(EventSourceManager eventSourceManager) {...}
}
----

> == Some logic to give an example what can be done with an operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Some logic to give an example of what can be done with an operator
```

> When the custom resource HelloWorld is created or updated operator receives an event and based on this event it creates a stateful set according to custom object content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the custom resource HelloWorld is created or updated the operator receives an event. Based on this event it creates a stateful set according to custom object content.
```

               .endPort()
               .endContainer()
               .endSpec()
               .endTemplate()
               .withNewSelector()
               .addToMatchLabels("app", spec.getName())
               .endSelector()
               .endSpec()
               .build();

       kubernetesClient.apps().statefulSets().inNamespace(namespace).create(statefulset);

       return UpdateControl.noUpdate();

   } else if (statefulset.getStatus().getReplicas() < spec.getReplicas()) {

       log.info("Scale statefulset up: " + spec.getName());

       kubernetesClient.apps()
               .statefulSets()
               .inNamespace(namespace).withName(spec.getName()).scale(statefulset.getStatus().getReplicas() + 1, true);

       return UpdateControl.noUpdate();

   } else if (statefulset.getStatus().getReplicas() > spec.getReplicas()) {

       log.info("Scale statefulset down: " + spec.getName());

       kubernetesClient.apps()
               .statefulSets()
               .inNamespace(namespace).withName(spec.getName()).scale(spec.getReplicas(), true);

       return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
   }

   return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
----
====

> Containers are running following command to check if the data is present in the container, and outputs an error to a log if data is not present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Containers are running the following command to check if the data is present in the container, and outputs an error to a log if data is not present.
```

----
"while sleep 5; do cat /tmp/data.txt; done"
----

PodWatcher watches pod creatiion and modification

[,java]
----
public class PodWatcher {

private final KubernetesClient kubernetesClient;

void onStartup(@Observes StartupEvent startupEvent) throws IOException {

   public PodWatcher(KubernetesClient kubernetesClient) {
      this.kubernetesClient = kubernetesClient;
   }

   kubernetesClient.pods().watch(new Watcher<Pod>() {

   @Override
   public void eventReceived(Action action, Pod pod) {...}

   @Override
   public void onClose(WatcherException e) {...}
});

}
----

Start an operator

.QuarkusApplication.java
[,java]
----
@QuarkusMain
public class Main implements QuarkusApplication {

   @Inject
   Operator operator;

   public static void main(String... args) {
       Quarkus.run(Main.class, args);
   }

   @Override
   public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
       operator.start();
       Quarkus.waitForExit();
       return 0;
   }
}
----

> When pod is created, operator fetches logs and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When pod is created, the operator fetches logs and
```

> checks if the data from custom object is present in the pod, in case if it is not present operator outputs data to a file in the pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
checks if the data from the custom object is present in the pod, in case if it is not present operator outputs data to a file in the pod.
```

[,java]
.PodWatcher.java
----
log.info("Get pod logs " + pod.getMetadata().getName());

String logs = kubernetesClient.pods()
        .inNamespace(namespace)
        .withName(podName)
        .getLog();

log.info("Check if data is available in pod " + pod.getMetadata().getName());

if (!logs.contains("Example of injected data")) {
    log.info("Inject data into pod " + podName);
    newExecWatch(kubernetesClient, namespace, podName, spec.getData());
}
----

----
echo "Example of injected data" > /tmp/data.txt
----

> After executing a command, the operator checks the log of the current pod  again. If the application has consumed the data, it adds one pod to the replica set cluster and repeats this operation until all desired pods are present and contain the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After executing a command, the operator checks the log of the current pod again. If the application has consumed the data, it adds one pod to the replica set cluster and repeats this operation until all desired pods are present and contain the data.
```

                        }
                        {
                            log.info("Statefulset size: " + statefulset.getStatus().getReplicas() + ", desired: " + statefulset.getStatus().getReplicas());
                        }

                    }

                }

            }

            @Override
            public void onClose(WatcherException e) {

            }
        });

    }

    private ExecWatch newExecWatch(KubernetesClient client, String namespace, String podName, String data) {
        return client.pods().inNamespace(namespace).withName(podName)
                .readingInput(System.in)
                .writingOutput(System.out)
                .writingError(System.err)
                .withTTY()
                .usingListener(new SimpleListener())
                .exec("sh", "-c", "echo \"" + data + "\" > /tmp/data.txt");
    }

    void scaleStatefulSet(String namespace, String name, int replicaSize) {

        log.info("Scale statefulset " + name);
        kubernetesClient.apps().statefulSets().inNamespace(namespace).withName(name).scale(replicaSize + 1, true);

    }

}
----
====

== Operator deployment in the cluster

> The files for building docker images are generated during project creation by https://code.quarkus.io[quarkus.io] and Kubernetes resources for operator deployment are generated by operator SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The files for building docker images are generated during project creation by https://code.quarkus.io[quarkus.io] and the Kubernetes resources for operator deployment are generated by the operator SDK.
```

Build the application

----
./mvnw package
----

Build docker image
----
docker build -f \
src/main/docker/Dockerfile.jvm \
-t user/k8-operator-quarkus-hello-world:1.0.0-SNAPSHOT .
----

> Deploy cluster role and role binding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the cluster role and role binding
```

.cluster-rolebinding.yaml
[%collapsible]
====
[,yaml]
----
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: quarkus-operatork-example
rules:
  - apiGroups:
      - ""
    resources:
      - pods
    verbs:
      - get
      - list
      - watch
      - create
      - update
      - delete
      - patch
  - apiGroups:
      - apiextensions.k8s.io
    resources:
      - customresourcedefinitions
    verbs:
      - get
      - list
      - watch
      - create
      - update
      - delete
      - patch
  - apiGroups:
      - example.com
      - helloworlds.example.com
    resources:
      - helloworlds
    verbs:
      - get
      - list
      - watch
      - create
      - update
      - delete
      - patch
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: code-with-quarkus-admin
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name: code-with-quarkus
    namespace: default
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: quarkus-operator-example
  apiGroup: ""
----
====

----
kubectl apply -f deployment/cluster-rolebinding.yaml
----

> Deploy an operator in a cluster using auto-generated kubernetes resources such as https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/[RBAC], https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/[Service], https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/[ServiceAccount], https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/[Deployment].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy an operator in a cluster using auto-generated kubernetes resources such as https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/[RBAC], https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/[Service], https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/[ServiceAccount], or/and https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/[Deployment].
```

I think this is missing an `or/and`

       log.info("Scale statefulset down: " + spec.getName());

       kubernetesClient.apps()
               .statefulSets()
               .inNamespace(namespace).withName(spec.getName()).scale(spec.getReplicas(), true);

       return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
   }

   return UpdateControl.noUpdate();
----
====

Containers are running the following command to check if the data is present in the container, and outputs an error to a log if data is not present.

----
"while sleep 5; do cat /tmp/data.txt; done"
----

PodWatcher watches pod creation and modification. This functionality provides the ability to dynamically react to changes of the cluster resources.

[,java]
----
public class PodWatcher {

private final KubernetesClient kubernetesClient;

void onStartup(@Observes StartupEvent startupEvent) throws IOException {

   public PodWatcher(KubernetesClient kubernetesClient) {
      this.kubernetesClient = kubernetesClient;
   }

   kubernetesClient.pods().watch(new Watcher<Pod>() {

   @Override
   public void eventReceived(Action action, Pod pod) {...}

   @Override
   public void onClose(WatcherException e) {...}
});

}
----

> Start an operator

Reviewer 2: You should probably make this a section header (H4 or H5?)

Author: updated some of the phrases to make then section headers

.QuarkusApplication.java
[,java]
----
@QuarkusMain
public class Main implements QuarkusApplication {

   @Inject
   Operator operator;

   public static void main(String... args) {
       Quarkus.run(Main.class, args);
   }

   @Override
   public int run(String... args) throws Exception {
       operator.start();
       Quarkus.waitForExit();
       return 0;
   }
}
----

> When pod is created, the operator fetches logs and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a pod is created, the operator fetches logs and
```

= Kubernetes Operator with Java and Quarkus

== The goal of this blog post
An Operator can be used for various reasons. The most common purposes of operators are managing database clusters, preparing database schemas, and restoring backups.

> I'd avoid using `etc` in your leading sentence.

Reviewer: This was just a comment, not meant to be included.

Author: I updated this part.
